Intermediate tour: Null safety chapter (#4734)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/tour/kotlin-tour-intermediate-null-safety.md

[//]: # (title: Intermediate: Null safety)

In the beginner's tour, you learned how to handle `null` values in your code but there are also use cases where using 
null safety features can be helpful.

## Smart casts and safe casts

You already know how to explicitly declare the type of a variable or object and that Kotlin sometimes has the ability
to infer the type without explicit declaration. When you tell Kotlin to treat a variable or object as if it belongs to a
specific type, this process is called **casting**. When a type is automatically cast, like when it's inferred, it's called
**smart casting**.

> Before we explore how casting works, how can you check if an object has a certain type? For this, you can use the

Reviewer: Just a nitpick, I feel like the connection in the first sentence is not very clear, what about:

> Before we explore how casting works, let's learn how you can check if an object has a certain type.

or

> Before exploring how casting works, let's see how to check if an object has a certain type.

> `is` and `!is` operators with `when` or `if`:

Author: In the beginner tour, we refer to `when` or `if` without calling them conditions. Can we do the same here? https://kotlinlang.org/docs/kotlin-tour-control-flow.html#conditional-expressions

> `is` and `!is` operators with `when` or `if`:

Reviewer: Maybe just expressions? It's just that in this sentence, `is` and `!is?` have a term, but `when` and `if` don't

> `is` and `!is` operators with `when` or `if`:

Author: I see now. I went with "conditional expressions". Since `when` can be an expression or a statement 😉

* `is` checks if the object has the type and returns a boolean value.
* `!is` checks if the object **doesn't** have the type and returns a boolean value.

> You've already seen this in practice when you learned about sealed classes in the [Open and other special classes](kotlin-tour-intermediate-classes-part-3.md) chapter.

Reviewer: This note breaks the flow a little bit; maybe move it under the code as a tip?

To explicitly cast an object to a non-nullable type, but return `null` instead of throwing an error on failure, use the `as?`
operator. Since the `as?` operator doesn't trigger an error on failure, it is called the **safe** operator.

```kotlin
fun main() {
//sampleStart
    val a: String? = null
    val b = a as? String

    // Returns null value
    print(b)
    // null
//sampleEnd
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" id="kotlin-tour-null-safety-safe-operator"}

The `as?` operator can be combined with the Elvis operator `?:`, to reduce several lines of code to one. For example,
the following `calculateTotalStringLength()` function that calculates the total length of all strings provided in a mixed list,
can be reduced from:

```kotlin
fun calculateTotalStringLength(items: List<Any>): Int {
    var totalLength = 0

    for (item in items) {
        totalLength += if (item is String) {
            item.length
        } else {
            0  // Add 0 for non-String items
        }
    }

    return totalLength
}
```

To:

```kotlin
fun calculateTotalStringLength(items: List<Any>): Int {
    return items.sumOf { (it as? String)?.length ?: 0 }
}
```

> In the first version, the example:

Reviewer: It might be even better to have these lists with explanations right next to the code
Plus, visually is would help to avoid to consequent lists

Author: I restructured it as you suggest :)

        "appConfig.json" to "App Configuration",
        "dbConfig.json" to "Database Configuration"
    )

    val requestedFile = "appConfig.json"
    val configFiles = listOfNotNull(serverConfig[requestedFile])

    println(configFiles)
    // [App Configuration]
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" id="kotlin-tour-null-safety-listofnotnull"}

In both of these examples, if all items are `null` values, an empty list is returned.

Kotlin also provides functions that you can use to find values in collections. If a value isn't found, they return `null`
values instead of triggering an error:

* [`singleOrNull()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.collections/single-or-null.html), looks for only one item by its exact value. If one doesn't exist or there are multiple items with the same value, returns a `null` value.
* [`maxOrNull()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.collections/max-or-null.html), finds the highest value. If one doesn't exist, returns a `null` value.
* [`minOrNull()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.collections/min-or-null.html), finds the lowest value. If one doesn't exist, returns a `null` value.

> > The `singleOrNull()`, `maxOrNull()`, and `minOrNull()` functions are designed to be used with collections that **don't**

Reviewer: Again, I feel like the note here breaks the flow (and makes it look like the example is directly connected to the note, and not to the list), consider moving it lower

You may notice that the code could be more concise without an early return. However, this approach needs multiple safe 
calls because the `users[userId]` might return a `null` value, making the code slightly harder to read:

```kotlin
fun getNumberOfFriends(users: Map<Int, User>, userId: Int): Int {
    // Retrieve the user or return -1 if not found
    return users[userId]?.friends?.size ?: -1
}
```
{validate="false"}

Although this example checks only one condition with the Elvis operator, you can add multiple checks to cover any critical
error paths. Early returns with the Elvis operator prevent your program from doing unnecessary work and make your code 
safer by stopping as soon as a `null` value or invalid case is detected.

For more information about how you can use `return` in your code, see [Returns and jumps](returns.md).

## Null safety practice

### Exercise 1 {initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true" id="null-safety-exercise-1"}

You are developing a notification system for an app where users can enable or disable different types of notifications.
Complete the `getNotificationPreferences()` function so that:

> 1. The `validUser` variable uses the `as?` operator to check if `user` is a `User` object. If it isn't, return an empty list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The `validUser` variable uses the `as?` operator to check if `user` is an object of the `User` class. If it isn't, return an empty list.
```
